And
after two years, Carl resigned as director. And I
was appointed acting director. And I was acting
director for the year 1950.
And this opposition to my being director still
existed, still persisted. But I had some powerful
allies. many of them out here at Scripps,
including Detlef Bronk, who was at that time
president, I guess, of Johns Hopkins University
and president of the National Academy of Sciences
and president of AAAS all at the same time. And
another one is a man named Bert Walford in the
Bureau of Commercial Fisheries.
Bert suggested that we have a conference on the
future of the Scripps Institution. And we bring to
this conference people from all over the world.
And this was at some time, I think, in the spring of
1950. I'm pretty sure that's when it
was. Although I'm not quite sure. I'm pretty sure
it was the spring of 1950.
Maybe it was in the fall.
The reason I think it was in the spring was before
the loyalty controversy erupted.
And Sproul was, of course, very much in favor of my
being correct. Bob Sproul, president of the
university. And that's why he was willing to
sponsor this conference. And he did. And Braun
came out to it. And Columbus has a letter from Woods
Hole. a lot of guys who were good friends of mine.
And we spent three or four days talking about the
future of oceanography and the future of the
Scripps Institution.
And
it was an inspiring affair in many ways.
Later, at the end of it, we dedicated it to Thomas
Whelan Vaughan Aquarium Museum. and Bronk made
the dedication speech, and I was supposed to play a
record that T. Willie, that Vaughn had made. He
couldn't, he was too old and too ill to come out
himself, but he made a phonograph, I mean, a
recording. It was actually, I think, I'm not sure
whether it was a tape recording or a phonograph
recording, but a disc recording. And I forgot to
play the damn thing. But anyhow, other than that,
Sproul was in good form and Brock was in good form.
That was quite clear after that that I was going to
be the next director. But then we had all hell broke
loose because the
Regents, those were the days of McCarthy.
The Regents passed a resolution that all faculty
members had to sign a loyalty note saying they were
not a communist. Not communist. Yeah, not a
communist.
And a lot of people at Berkeley and UCLA didn't want
to sign that note. Not that they were communists,
but they thought this was an infringement of
academic freedom. Maybe even some of them were
communists for all I know. I don't think, I don't
think many of them were. the worst thing about it
was that the regents said if you don't sign the
oath, you get fired, you get discharged. That
violated the principle of academic tenure, which
I think is an absolutely fundamental principle in
the university. So none of our guys down here
signed the thing. Well, that's under my
leadership. And we were brought into the academic
senate councils at UCLA and Berkeley and a lot of My
colleagues like Michael Bryan and the Dean of
Engineering were on the same side. He didn't quite
understand why, but if I was on it, he was going to be
on it too.
David Saxon was a very powerful, not powerful, but
very dedicated man
of fighting the regions to now become president of
the University of California. He's the new
president. He was a young assistant professor of
physics then.
And we managed to get old Howling Mad Smith on our
side. He lived here in La Jolla. Holland M. Smith,
the great Marine Corps general. He was a wonderful
man. He was not a West Pointer, Indianapolis man.
He was a lawyer. Took a law degree and then went into
the Marines. Became a great general. But he still
remembered his law. And as a lawyer, he decided
that this was ridiculous, that this was really an
infringement of academic freedom and a violation
of tenure. So he became an ardent supporter of our
side, went to see Governor Warren. I remember very
well a couple of these little old ladies in tennis
shoes with a fest La Jolla came up to him and said,
General, why won't those professors sign a simple
oath saying they're not communists.
And the general turned to them in his sternest
voice and manner and said, Madam, if somebody
asked you to sign an oath saying you were not a
whore, what would you do?
And they just, that was the last time they ever
spoke to him. And I was one of the witnesses before
the alumni committee. So it was quite clear that I
wasn't a communist, having been in the Navy for
seven years and never really taken any part in
political activity. So I was a good witness. And
Don McLaughlin and Bechtel, Steve Bechtel, the
head of the Bechtel Corporation, were members of
this alumni committee and various other very
decent citizens. and great men in California. And
they proposed what was called the Alumni
Compromise, which was that
there would be a committee appointed by the
Academic Senate to investigate all those people
who had not signed the oath. And that committee
would recommend what should be done with each
individual case like nothing for example. This
was considered by the regents at a meeting in Davis
when Governor Warren was there. He was presiding.
The governor of California is ex officio the
president of the Board of Regents, not the
chairman, but the president. But when he's there,
he presides.
And the regents passed this by a pretty large
majority. This alumni compromise. I never will
forget. I was sitting in the audience, of course.
And I never will forget that occasion because
Mario Giannini, the son of AP Giannini, Mario was
then head of the Bank of America, the biggest bank
in the country,
said, the flags will fly in the Kremlin tonight. I
hereby resign from this board of regents. I'm
going to devote the rest of my life to organizing
vigilantes to fight communism. He said just
exactly those words, believe it or not. That gives
you some idea of the spirit of that awful time.
Well, you know, in Texas, we had to sign it by law. It
was passed by state law. Any state employee had to
sign the Loyalty Act, as I remember. Well, if you
have to do it by law, you've got to do it. The Regents
didn't have that legal authority. We said we would
sign it.
We would obey the law. We wouldn't sign something
that was imposed by the regents. And Governor
Warren said, Mario, you don't want to do that. The
Democratic thing to do is for you to stay here and
try to convince us we're wrong. Don't resign from
the board. Stay on the board and try to persuade us
to change our mind.
Gene, nevertheless, he did resign. And I took an
oath that I would vote for Governor Warren from
then on, no matter what he ran for. Unfortunately,
he never ran for anything again. A few weeks later,
he was appointed Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court.
That was a 19, well, not a few weeks later, a couple
of years later, actually. This was in 1950. And
then we, then Russ Rade and I,
I guess not many other members of the faculty. We
went out on our mid-Pacific expedition in the
summer of 1950. That was a two-ship expedition.
That was the first great exploring expedition of
the Scripps Institution in 1950. We went out. One
of the things we discovered was the mid-Pacific
mountains. That's where the mountain range runs
west of Hawaii. Another was we measured the heat
flow coming through the sea floor. found that
about the same as the continental heat flow. Rust
rate made a lot of seismic measurements, which
showed that the sediments were only about 100
meters thick. This was the beginning, really, of
the great series of discoveries that had ended up
in plate tectonics.
These seamounts, 6,000 people at the surface.
Laptop, all been at the surface. very young, not
old. There was no place in the ocean that was very
old. It was thought that they were perhaps two
billion years old, because they were so deep. Very
thin sediments, which tied in exactly with the
idea that the sea floor was very young. The heat
flow, which couldn't be explained in any other way
except by convection and
And later, of course, later expeditions we looked
at the trenches and
the mid-ocean ridges, particularly the magnetic
striping,
which is another story. Well, how much longer do
you want to go
with that? Starting with the Mid-Pac Expedition
in 1950, we organized more and more exploring
expeditions over larger and larger areas of the
Pacific. These were led by a series of inspired
expedition leaders. I led the Mid-Pacific
Expedition and what we call the Capricorn
Expedition. But most of the expeditions were led
by Warren Wooster and by Bill Menard, by Bob
Fisher,
One was . Those
are the three that occurred to me offhand as the
people who really were very good at this. And we
gradually built up our fleet of ships. And we had
more and more kinds of expeditions. For example,
we had one in the South China Sea that lasted maybe
three years, South China Sea and the Gulf of
Thailand. She called it the Naga expedition. The
leader of that started out to be a Dane named Anton
Brun, but he got sick, got immediate dysentery,
and was taken over by the captain, Jim Moore, also
an inspiring leader.
He's a very special kind of guy. Morris Ewing was
very good at it. Different people do it in
different ways, but
the essential thing is to make everybody feel that
he's getting his share of the pie. All the people on
board are doing something that advances their own
research interests.
And that you have adequate equipment, adequate
crewing and personnel. competent personnel,
complicated planning and logistics as well as
operational business. Another man very good at
this was Johnny Knauss. In fact, we sort of
specialize in producing oceanographic
administrators at Scripps. Most of the
oceanographic institutions in this country are
led by Scripps graduates, or partially led. For
example, Art Maxwell at Woods Hole, Johnny Knauss
at Rhode Island. Warren Wooster just retired from
the Rosenstiel Laboratory at the University of
Miami, Dick Fleming in Seattle, Dale Lieber in
Texas A&M.
Anyhow, they had good training with being a
director of an institution to lead some
expeditions. And I was pretty good at that. I was
never much of an administrator, sure, but I was a
good administrator at sea. Anyhow,
about 1955, I never went to sea anymore.
One of the reasons for this was that I decided that
we were not treating our graduate students very
well. I felt two things, and I always have felt. one
of them, and that is that research and teaching are
inseparable. That you just can't do a good job of
teaching without research, and you can't do a good
job of research without teaching. And if you look
at laboratories that are divorced from
universities, they never last for more than,
they're never very good for more than a
generation. They don't reproduce themselves.
You need to have young people, and you need to have
the the enthusiasm, the energy, the iconoclasm,
and the
confidence that young people, young scientists
have. And so it was quite essential from my point of
view that we should have good graduate students
here at Scripps. But guys like Art Maxwell and
Johnny Knauss and some of the others, had a hard
time with their doctoral exams. And I thought the
reason for it was a lot of them did. Not just those
two, but those were two outstanding people who had
trouble with their doctoral exams. I thought the
reason for it was that they were divorced from the
basic sciences. We were 120 miles away from UCLA.
It was a killing trip to get up there. The people who
came down here tended to stay here and not to take
any more courses in physics or chemistry or
biology or mathematics or engineering, which are
basic to oceanographic research or
oceanographic work. Oceanography is not really a
science. Oceanography is the application of
science to an object of study, namely the ocean,
and what lives in the ocean, what's beneath the
ocean, what's above the ocean. whole range of
phenomena of the watery part of our planet. And
therefore what you need is good physicists and
good chemists and good biologists, who at the same
time are fascinated by this complex set of
phenomena that occur in the ocean. And I think you
need people who are, you need at least some of these
people to be trained in oceanographic
institutions. as graduate students. The reason I
do is that
going to sea is more than just an art. Doing science
at sea, there's an artistic component to it. But it
also takes a certain kind of scientific
imagination and scientific planning. And even
more important, Every part of the ocean is related
to every other part of the ocean. You can't do
marine physics very well without also knowing
something about marine chemistry and marine
biology. The story I told you about the snapping
shrimp and the deep scattering layer illustrates
that very well indeed. You need to have respect for
and understanding of, if you're a physical
oceanographer, what the biologists know and what
they're interested in, and vice versa. So that
means that you really need Some people to be
trained in an oceanographic institution will
have this breadth of view and special kind of
experience. On the other hand, they also need to
know as much basic science as possible. It's a
tough business to do both those things. And it's
essentially impossible if the nearest
university, basic university, is 120 miles away.
Woods Hole has discovered the same thing.
I thought of a way to solve this problem, which was
to establish down here a graduate school of
science and engineering,
which I thought of as like Caltech. If you look at
Caltech, it's got mostly graduate students. It's
only got 500 undergraduates and about 1,500
graduate students.
The only difference would be that this would be a
state-supported institution rather than a
privately-supported institution. But in those
days, that difference didn't look like it was very
much of a difference, because everybody was
riding high. Prosperity was not only around the
corner, it was here with a bang for the bang. And the
taxes income of the University of California was
increasing by leaps and bounds, even though
everybody always poor-mouthed it.
I got a good deal of support from the Chamber of
Commerce and the industrial, the conveyor and the
other industrial people in San Diego. And I
brought Rosson Bennett out here, the man I told you
about before. By this time he was chief of Naval
Research, head of the Office of Naval Research.
And he made a speech. He had been here before. He was
well known in San Diego because he'd been His last
job before becoming chief of the Bureau of Naval
Research was he was commander of the Naval
Electronics Laboratory, director of the Naval
Electronics Laboratory, which was the old Navy
radio and sound laboratory. That's a big job. He
was well known. He came out and gave a speech to
local citizens, including the city manager and
the mayor and the bigwigs of San Diego. and said
that the Navy was all for this, and would support it
vigorously, and would support research there,
and also said it was a damn good thing for San Diego,
which he knew well. And it was a very powerful and
very effective speech. And the people of San Diego
wanted this anyhow, so this was just an added
bonus. But the main thing that Rawson did was to
overcome the opposition of other campuses of the
university, particularly UCLA. It was always
very jealous of us because we never did much
teaching and we got lots of money from the
government and lots of members of the National
Academy and things like that. Not many by that
time, but still several at that time. Several.
More than they had at UCLA. And the worst blow of all
to the UCLA people was when we persuaded Harold
Urey to come out here. I'd gotten to know Harold
pretty well in
Washington in
connection with my interest in geochemistry.
I went to see him and persuaded him to come, to get to
the Scripps Institution, having in mind,
however, that we would have this School of Science
and Engineering about the same time Jim Arnold
came here, and him, Craig, and Hans Seuss, who were
very, particularly Hans Seuss was a great
scientist, recognized as one. I guess they came
first, and then Harold. Anyhow, you guys at UCLA
took a very dim view of our getting Urey. And they
insisted to Sproul that he not be a professor at
Scripps, but a professor at large in the
university. So if they could claim two,
particularly a man named Louis Slichter, who was
director of the Institute of Geophysics, felt
this way. Because he said, if I hadn't talked
Harold into coming here, he would have come to
UCLA. He might or might not. Anyhow, there were a
series of committees from the other campuses that
took a very dim view of this school of science and
engineering.
The engineers said that we can do the whole job for
the university extension. One of the reasons for
having it was to upgrade the quality of the
engineers and scientists that were working for
Aurora and Solar and Convair and the other high
technology industries here.
And they had, the School of Engineering at UCLA had
a program down here which was designed to do this.
And they said, why can't we just expand that? But
Glenn Seaborg came down on one of these
committees, and Ernest Lawrence was on that
committee, too. And they were from Berkeley,
which is far enough away so we weren't a threat. And
they always liked big ideas. So they
enthusiastically backed it. And the result was
that the regents voted to establish it. This was
about 1956 or 57. And
the city of San Diego voted to give the university
high-speed
art. I'm a little bit confused about the actual
detailed sequence of events. The upshot or the
fact was that the School of Science and
Engineering never got off the ground,
even though the city had voted this as 50 acres of
land. And the reason was that the regents got a
bigger idea. There was a state office of education
report
based upon demographic projections of the future
of California. They said we were going to have 50
million people here by the year 2000. Those were
the days when the birth rate was right in the middle
of the baby boom. Birth rate was still going up. And
people were flocking into California because of
the rise of high technology industry here.
And all the projections showed the population of
California just going up and up to 50 million
people by the end of the century.
So they decided, and it was recommended,
All three segments of public higher education in
California should be expanded. Those were the
junior colleges, which were locally paid for and
locally managed by cities out of the city taxes,
like public schools, but with a contribution from
the state colleges, which
offered a full four-year college education to a
rather large percentage of high school
graduates.
And the university, which offered not only
undergraduate but also graduate education and
research, and had a very restrictive admissions
policy, only the top one-eighth of the high school
graduates.
And this admissions policy was formalized by the
Coordinating Board of Higher Education of
California, composed of four segments, three
public segments plus a private
college, that the uni colleges would admit every
high school graduate, state colleges would admit
the top 35%, and the University of California the
top 12.5%
as freshmen, and that they would also The
university would also have met graduates of the
junior colleges who were qualified.
And they decided on that basis that they needed
three new campuses of 27,500 students each.
And they would also expand Santa Barbara and
Riverside and Davis.
that they would have these three big new campuses.
And one of these was going to be in Northern
California and two in Southern California. And it
seemed logical that one of them would be in San
Diego County.
Two in the Los Angeles area. I mean, one in the Los
Angeles area, one new one in the Los Angeles area,
plus UCLA.
One new one in Northern California.
And so they sort of put the School of Science and
Engineering on the back burner and decided to go
ahead with a search for sites for these three new
campuses.
And the firm of Pereira and Luckman, the
architectural firm of Pereira and Luckman,
got the job of making a survey of where the new
campus in San Diego County should be.
I thought right from the very beginning it should
be right as close as possible to the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography.
The alternative would have been to build up the
School of Science and Engineering, which they
agreed to, and which they got the land for.